The discovery of new drugs – or generally compounds that can be used for new drugs – is a
both expensive and time consuming process. From the identification of the first promising
molecules (leads) over to clinical trials and until market release it is estimated that this process
takes about 14 years and costs 800 million US dollars\cite{Wouters2020}. Efforts
to shorten this process and to minimize costs is an obvious and logical conclusion. For finding
new leads two different approaches have been established in the past: High-throughput
screening (HTS) and virtual screening (VS).\\

In HTS a large number of molecules are tested for their impact on a specific target, usually a
protein, by addressing whether the molecule biochemically reacts with the target or not. This is
done on so called HTS assays and compounds showing positive results (hits) are then used for
further research. It is important that these positive hits are further analysed and re-confirmed as
actually being positive because in case of a false positive a lot of time and money could
potentially be wasted. Contrary, false negative results could mean that a valuable drug candidate
will not be further considered, although this tends to be only an issue if there are no positives
found at all. It should be emphasized however that the goal of HTS is not to find all potential
candidates in a library collection of compounds but enough to have as set for initial discovery
efforts. HTS is a time-consuming process, requires specific infrastructure and has low success
rates of below 5\%, yet it still has been the method of choice for the last 20 years (Kontoyianni,
2017).
One the other hand, while HTS is an experimental, in vitro approach the contrary is the case for
VS which is a theoretical, in silico approach. In VS a digital library of chemically diverse
compounds is screened for leads. Since VS is a computational method it is faster, more costefficient and less resource intensive than its counterpart HTS (Tang \& Marshall, 2011). VS can
be further divided into two sub-categories, namely ligand-based virtual screening (LBVS) and
structure-based virtual screening (SBVS). In LBVS strategies the structure-activity data from a
set of known, active ligands is used to identify possible targets for experimental evaluation.
Among the methods used in LBVS are similarity and substructure searching, quantitative
structure-activity relationships and 3D shape matching. On the other hand, SBVS makes use of
the 3D structure of the biological target. Consequentially the structure of the target has to be
either known beforehand or analysed via X-ray crystallography, NMR spectroscopy or
computationally via homology modelling. Then a set of ligands is fitted into the binding site of
the target (docking) and a score – usually based on the predicted binding affinity – is used to
rank the ligands and determine if they are active or not (Lavecchia \& Di Giovanni, 2013).
SBVS can be further sub-divided by distinguishing approaches that use rigid docking versus
approaches that use flexible docking (McInnes, 2007). In rigid-body docking the ligand is
searched in a six-dimensional translational or rotational space to fit in the binding pocket of the
target protein. The complex is then evaluated in terms of shape of the fitted ligand and the
binding site, as well as the electrostatic, van der Waals and Coulombic interactions that may
2
take place. The docking score is usually then the sum of these terms. The accuracy for rigidbody docking approaches tends to be much greater for bound complexes than in unbound
complexes. Even though the structural differences between bound and unbound molecules are
small they affect the docking accuracy noticeably (Pagadala, Syed \& Tuszynski, 2017).
Biological targets are in fact not rigid in nature but adjust dynamically. However,
experimentally resolved structures of targets with bound or unbound ligands are isolated
snapshots and do not reflect the flexibility that happens in nature (Kontoyianni, 2017).
Consequentially new docking approaches were developed that allowed ligand or receptor
flexibility. In the simple case the softening of van der Vaals potentials – also called “soft
docking” – can allow small overlaps between the receptor and the ligand in the binding pocket.
The downside is that this may lead to an increase in false positives as more diverse structures
are allowed to bind (Lavecchia \& Di Giovanni, 2013). The more sophisticated and most
common approach in standard virtual docking studies is having a flexible ligand while fitting
into a rigid receptor. Generally four different strategies are in use when docking a flexible
ligand: The application of Monte Carlo methods; combinatorial search; ligand buildup
algorithms, where ligands are built directly in the binding site of the protein; and site-mapping
and fragment assembly which extends the ligand buildup approach by connecting molecular
fragments to mapped functional groups in the binding site (Pagadala, Syed \& Tuszynski, 2017).
In nature, however, the receptor is also flexible and the binding site is altered according to the
orientation of the ligand by movement of the side chains (Pagadala, Syed \& Tuszynski, 2017).
Therefore flexible receptor docking also became of scientific interest and first programs as well
as theoretical approaches that are in constant development exist (Lavecchia \& Di Giovanni,
2013). One of these approaches is ensemble docking where a ligand is docked into multiple
conformations of the same protein (McInnes, 2007). The structures for ensemble docking are
usually taken from the Protein Data Bank (PDB), if available, or from molecular dynamics
simulations or from normal mode analyses (Berman et al., 2000; Kontoyianni, 2017).
In all SBVS approaches docking is followed up by scoring of the ligands. Even though
predicting one or more potential binding poses is possible most of the times with available
docking methods, identifying the correct binding pose and ranking the ligands are still
challenging tasks which are tackled by scoring functions. Firstly, scoring functions aim to
identify the energetically preferred pose out of a set of bound poses that were generated by the
docking algorithm for a single ligand. Secondly, the scoring function is used to rank different
docked ligands in order to discriminate between active and inactive compounds. Scoring
functions are a major research topic in the docking community with many problems still to be
overcome and procedures to be refined. To name an example, one of the difficulties of scoring
functions stems from the fact that a lot of factors, like molecular interactions, are not easy to
parameterize. Generally existing scoring functions can be divided into three broad groups:
Force field-based scoring functions, knowledge-based scoring functions and empirical scoring
functions. Additionally, some scoring functions also combine these approaches (Lavecchia \&
Di Giovanni, 2013).
3
In force field-based scoring functions the binding free energy is estimated by the sum of the
independent molecular mechanic force field potentials like Coulomb, van der Waals and
hydrogen bonds. Furthermore, solvation and entropy contributions are also considered in some
cases. On the other hand in empirical scoring functions interaction terms like hydrogen bonds
and hydrophobic contacts are estimated by fitting the scoring function to the experimental
binding affinity data of a training dataset of protein-ligand complexes. Subsequently the binding
free energy for the docked ligands is calculated as the weighted sum of these terms. Thirdly,
knowledge-based scoring functions are exclusively derived by statistically analysing the atompair frequencies of known 3D structures from protein-ligand complexes (Lavecchia \& Di
Giovanni, 2013).
Since this work makes use of an SBVS approach, current developments and state of the art in
the field are described in the following section